Summer School in Numerical Mathematics
======================================

Numerical Analysis, Image Processing and Surface Computing
----------------------------------------------------------

Numerical Analysis is the study of algorithms for solving the problems
of continuous science.  By "algorithm" we mean a sequence of
calculations, typically performed on a computer.  This is a broad and
exciting subject.  This course will introduce (or review, depending on
your background) some basic areas of numerical analysis.  We will then
explore, computationally, several application areas which intersect
with cutting-edge Oxford Mathematics research.



Topics and Schedule
-------------------

*   Week 2:

    +   Monday--Wednesday: background material in Numerical Analysis,
        Finite differences and interpolation.  Quadrature.
        Interpolation in barycentric form.  Numerical solution of
        differential equations (ODEs and PDEs).  Software
        considerations.

    +   Wednesday: Midterm.
    +   Thursday: no lectures.
    +   Friday: Image processing.

*    Week 3: no lectures.

*    Week 4: Image processing and computing on curved surfaces, project
     work.



Lecturers
---------

 *  Prof. Colin Macdonald, Associate Professor in Numerical
    Methodologies, Tutorial Fellow at Oriel College, University of
    Oxford.

 *  Dr Martin Robinson, Postdoctoral Research Fellow, Mathematical
    Institute, University of Oxford.

 *  Mr Yujia Chen, DPhil Student, Mathematical Institute, University of
    Oxford.


Text Books
----------

None required, but for additional reading:

 * LeVeque, Finite Difference Methods for Ordinary and Partial
   Differential Equations, SIAM 2007.

 * SÃ¼li and Mayers, An Introduction to Numerical Analysis, CUP 2003.

And other references, papers and lecture notes to be added during the
course.


Website
-------

There may be various material online.  Start looking here:

[people.maths.ox.ac.uk/macdonald/CBL](http://people.maths.ox.ac.uk/macdonald/CBL)



Midterm
-------

There will be a midterm exam on Wednesday 13 August.


Projects and Presentations
--------------------------

Students will present the results of one or more projects towards the
end of the course.  Likely Thursday 28th August.  More details on
projects to follow.



Computations and Software
-------------------------

The projects and lectures will involve computation and programming.

*Matlab*: we recommend Matlab if you already have it.

*Octave*: alternatively, you can use GNU Octave which is Free/Open
Source Software.  Octave is included in the package managers for most
popular GNU/Linux distributions.

*Octave for Windows/Mac*: consult [wiki.octave.org/Octave_for_Microsoft_Windows](http://wiki.octave.org/Octave_for_Microsoft_Windows).
As of August 2014, we recommend the "3.8 MXE" build at
[mxeoctave.osuv.de](http://mxeoctave.osuv.de).  Consult their website
for Mac OS X installations.

*Tablets/phones*: one possibility is to use Octave within
 [cloud.sagemath.com](http://cloud.sagemath.com).  There are also
 Android apps for Octave and Matlab.


Other software
--------------

*Python*: The Python packages SciPy and NumPy are another possibility
(although we will focus on Matlab/Octave for this course).  Most of
the things we're doing could be easily done in Python as well.

*Revision control*: like many research groups, we use *Git* for
revision control.  This is a very useful skill to learn for graduate
school or for almost any career involving software.  On Windows/Mac
you might try the GUI "SourceTree".  We may use this software during
the course.

\LaTeX: you might consider using the Beamer class for your
presentation.  Also a necessary skill for graduate school.



